---
layout: post
title: "SMACSS"
date: 2016-09-27
---

<p>These are my notes from video tutorial <em>"SMACSS: Scalable Modular Architecture for CSS"</em> by Jonathan Snook on Pluralsight</p>

<h2>4 principles of SMACSS - Scalable Modular Architecture for CSS</h2>

<ol>
	
	<li>
		<h3>Categorization</h3>
		
		We often find ourselves mixing styles across each of these categories. If we are more aware of what we are trying to style, we can avoid the complexity that comes from intertwining these rules.

		We can identify 5 categories where :
		<ul>
			<li>
				<h4>Base</h4>
				Base rules are the defaults. They are almost exclusively single element selectors but it could include attribute selectors, pseudo-class selectors, child selectors or sibling selectors. There are no classes or ID's. That might be reset.css or normalize.css. This category should contain only an absolute minimum.

				<div class="example">
					<p class="example-header">Examples of Base rules</p>
					<div class="example-body">
{% highlight css %}html, body, form { margin: 0; padding: 0; }
input[type=text] { border: 1px solid #999; }
a { color: #039; }
a:hover { color: #03C; }{% endhighlight %}
					</div>
				</div>
				
			</li>
			<li>
				<h4>Layout</h4>
				Layout rules divide the page into sections. Layouts hold one or more modules together. Section layout contains selectors like: header, navebar, sidebar, content. There might be major containing elements, grid system. Generally it describes the way how we group our content.
			</li>
			<li>
				<h4>Module</h4>
				Modules are the reusable, modular parts of our design. They are the callouts, the sidebar sections, the product lists and so on. Modules: 
				<ul>
					<li>Contain content</li>
					<li>Are the majority of our sites</li>
					<li>Each module is an interface that your users have to learn</li>
					<li>Each module is code that has to be written, delivered and maintained</li>
					<li>Each module is isolated from other module</li>
					<li>And prevent styles form coming in or out</li>
				</ul>
			</li>
			<li>
				<h4>State</h4>
				State rules are ways to describe how our modules or layouts will look when in a particular state. Is it hidden or expanded? Is it active or inactive? They are about describing how a module or layout looks on screens that are smaller or bigger. They are also about describing how a module might look in different views like the home page or the inside page.
			</li>
			<li>
				<h4>Theme</h4>
				Theme rules are similar to state rules in that they describe how modules or layouts might look. Most sites don’t require a layer of theming but it is good to be aware of it.
			</li>
		</ul> 


	</li>

	<li><h3>Namin Convention</h3>
		<p>It is important to use a naming convention in all our projects to help clarify the intent of the CSS code. </p>
		
		<p>By separating rules into the five categories, naming convention is beneficial for immediately understanding which category a particular style belongs to and its role within the overall scope of the page. On large projects, it is more likely to have styles broken up across multiple files. In these cases, naming convention also makes it easier to find which file a style belongs to.
		Modules just use the name of the module itself.</p>

		<p>Modules just use the name of the module itself.</p>
		<p>Related elements within a module use the base name as a prefix.</p>
		
		<div class="example">
			<p class="example-header">Example classes: </p>
			<div class="example-body">
{% highlight css %}/* Modules */
.callout { }
.btn { }

/* 
Submodules - module variations 
In case of module variation, both, module class and module variation class 
have to be included on the same HTML element 
*/
.btn-large { }
.btn-small { }
.btn-default { }
.btn-search { }


/* 
Subcomponent - sub-element of module
This naming convention doesn't differentiate between
submodules ( module variations) and subcomponent (subelement) 	 
BEM convention does that but do we really need this?
*/
.example-content { }
.example-header { }
.example-footer { }



/* 
btn module with State -
use "is" keyword for state just after module name 
This state is specific to module btn so it has module name as a first prefix 
*/
.btn-is-collapsed { }

/* 
State without linking to specific module
use "is" keyword as a first prefix.
"is-" indicates likelihood of JS dependency
"is-" indicates a toggleable state 
*/
.is-hidden { }


/* Layout classes */
.layout-inline { }
.layout-sidebar { }
.layout-content { }

/* Theme classes */
.theme-header { }
.theme-border { }
.theme-background { }{% endhighlight %}
			</div>
		</div>
	

	</li>

		<li>
			<h3>Decoupling CSS from HTML</h3>
			<ul>
				<li><p>Avoid using deep nested rules - max 3 levels</p></li>
				<li><p>Try not to use tag selectors but if necessary always use child selector ">" to ensure that CSS apply this rule only to this specific element</p></li>
			</ul>

		</li>

	<li>

		<h3>State-based Design</h3>

		<p>
			<h4>State Representation:</h4>

			<ul>
				<li>
					<h5>Classes</h5>
					.btn.is-active
				</li>
				<li>
					<h5>Pseudo-classes</h5>
					added by browser - only ?  what with :last-child - is this a pseudo class?</li>
				<li>
					<h5>Attribute Selectors</h5>
					.btn[data-state=default]
				</li>
				<li>
					<h5>media Queries</h5>
				</li>
			</ul>

			<h3>Prototyping:</h3>

			<ul>
				<li>
					<h5>Build and test individual components</h5>
				</li>
				<li>
					<h5>Allow for front-end development independent of engineering</h5>
				</li>
				<li>
					<h5>Create centralized repository for multiple projects</h5>
				</li>
				<li>
					<h5>Proto Engine can use different technology then engineering</h5>
					patternlab.io - very good proto engine for PHP and NodeJS
				</li>
			</ul>
		</p>

	</li>

</ol>	

<p>
	<h2>final remarks: </h2>
	<ul>
		<li>Don't code CSS for the page. <strong>Code it for a system.</strong></li>
		<li><em>Performance:</em> Pull in style sheets when you need them.</li>
		<li><em>Performance:</em> Smaller rule sets make it easier on browsers - googel recommends a single ID or class selector</li>
		<li>The list of <a href="https://smacss.com/workshops/resources">resources</a> that were mentioned in the workshop</li>
	</ul>
</p>

